last overhaul of ZJSON (#2526)
brimdata/zed: docs/formats/zjson.md

# Zed over JSON

* [ZJSON](#zjson)
  + [Type Encoding](#type-encoding)
    - [Record Type](#record-type)
    - [Array Type](#array-type)
    - [Set Type](#set-type)
    - [Union type](#union-type)

>     - [Enum Type](#enum-type)
>   + [Alias Encoding](#alias-encoding)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - [Enum Type](#enum-type)
    - [Type Definition](#type-definition)
    - [Type Name](#type-name)
```

  + [Value Encoding](#value-encoding)
* [Framing ZJSON objects](#framing-zjson-objects)
* [Example](#example)

> The Zed data model is based on richly typed records and a deterministic column order,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Zed data model is based on richly typed records with a deterministic column order,
```

    "x": 4611686018427387904,
    "y": "127.0.0.1"
  }
}
```
But, when this JSON is transmitted to a JavaScript client and parsed,
the result looks something like this:
```
{
  "ts": 1521911721.926018,
  "a": "hello, world",
  "b": {
    "x": 4611686018427388000,
    "y": "127.0.0.1"
  }
}
```
The good news is the `a` field came through just fine, but there are
a few problems with the remaining fields:
* the timestamp lost precision (due to 53 bits of mantissa in a JavaScript
IEEE 754 floating point number) and was converted from a time type to a number,
* the int64 lost precision for the same reason, and
* the IP address has been converted to a string.

As a comparison, Python's `json` module handles the 64-bit integer to full
precision, but loses precision on the floating point timestamp.
Also, as mentioned, it is at the whim of a JSON implementation whether
or not the order of object keys is preserved.

While JSON is well suited for data exchange of generic information, it is not
so appropriate for a structured data model like Zed.
That said, JSON can be used as an encoding format for Zed by mapping Zed data
onto a JSON-based protocol.  This allows clients like web apps or

> electron apps to receive and understand Zed and, with the help of client

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Electron apps to receive and understand Zed and, with the help of client
```

libraries like [zealot](https://github.com/brimdata/brim/tree/master/zealot),

> to be enabled with rich, structured Zed types that are implemented on top of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to manipulate the rich, structured Zed types that are implemented on top of
```

the basic JavaScript types.

In other words,
because JSON objects do not have a deterministic column order nor does JSON
in general have typing beyond the basics (i.e., strings, floating point numbers,
objects, arrays, and booleans), we decided to encode Zed data with
its embedded type model all in a layer above regular JSON.

## ZJSON

The format for representing Zed in JSON is called ZJSON.
Converting ZSON/ZNG/ZST to ZJSON and back results in a complete and
accurate restoration of the original Zed data.

The ZJSON data model follows that of the underlying Zed model by embedding
type information in the stream: type definitions declare arbitrarily complex
and nested data types, and values are sent referencing the type information
recursively with small-integer type identifiers.

Since Zed steams are self describing and type information is embedded
in the stream itself, the embedded types are likewise encoded in the
ZJSON format.

A ZJSON stream is defined as a sequence of JSON objects where each object
represents a Zed value.  Each object includes an identifier that denotes
its type, or _schema_.  A schema generically refers to the type of the

> Zed record that is defined by a given JSON object.

Reviewer 2: This paragraph refers to "a Zed value" and then, later, "the Zed record". I think it will read better sticking to one or the other.

Author: Good catch.  ZJSON actually works for the generic Zed model (any stream of values not just records) so I adopted "Zed value" over record.  (Not that we've implemented this... :-)

Each object contains the following fields:
* `schema` a name encoded as a JSON string indicating the type that
applies to this value where the definition for the type appears in the
types field or in a previous occurrence of the types field in the stream,
* `values` a JSON array of strings and arrays encoded as defined below,
* `types` a JSON array of types where the types contain "TypeDef" types
establishing a binding between the names referred to by the `schema` fied.

The schema name provides a mapping to a type so that future values in the stream may
reference a type by name.  An implementation maintains a table to map schema names
to types as it decodes values.  The names are scoped to the particular ZJSON
data stream in which they are embedded and otherwise have no global persistence
or meaning.

Objects in a ZJSON stream have the following JSON structure:
```
{
  "schema": <id>,
  "values": [ <val>, ... [ <val>, ... ] ... ]
  "types": [ <type>, <type>, ... ]
}
```

### Type Encoding

> The type format follows the terminology in the ZSON spec, where primitive types

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The type format follows the terminology in the [ZSON spec](zson.md), where primitive types
```

        "name": "int64"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```
A type string may also contain a type name previously defined by a type definition.

#### Record Type

More formally, a Zed record type is a JSON object of the form
```
{
  "kind": "record",
  "fields": [ <field>, <field>, ... ]
}
```
where each of the fields has the form
```
{
  "name": <name>,
  "type": <type>,
}
```
and `<name>` is a string defining the column name and `<type>` is a
recursively encoded type.

#### Array Type

A Zed array type is defined by a JSON object having the form
```
{
  "kind": "array",
  "type": <type>
}
```
where `<type>` is a recursively encoded type.

#### Set Type

A Zed set type is defined by a JSON object having the form
```
{
  "kind": "set",
  "type": <type>
}
```
where `<type>` is a recursively encoded type.

#### Union type

A Zed union type is defined by a JSON object having the form
```
{
  "kind": "union",
  "types": [ <type>, <type>, ... ]
}
```
where the list of types comprise the types of the union and
and each `<type>`is a recursively encoded type.

#### Enum Type

A Zed enum type is a JSON object of the form
```
{
  "kind": "enum",
  "symbols": [ <string>, <string>, ... ]
}
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Don't forget maps!
~~~
#### Map Type

A Zed map type is defined by a JSON object of the form
```
{
  "kind": "map",
  "key_type": <type>,
  "val_type": <type>
}
```

~~~

#### Type Definition

> A type definitions is encoded as a binding between a name and a Zed type

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A type definition is encoded as a binding between a name and a Zed type
```

> and represents a new type so named.  A type definition type has the form:

Reviewer 2: For consistency.
```suggestion
and represents a new type so named.  A type definition type has the form
```

```
{
  "kind": "typedef",
  "name": <id>,
  "type": <type>,
}
```
where `<id>` is a JSON string representing the newly defined type name
and `<type>` is a recursively encoded type.

> If `<id>` is a non-integer string, then it is a "type name" that is a user visible
> type name.  If it is an integer, then it is is not user visible and is used  
> exclusively to collate firt-class Zed type values in the value array with
> their corresponding type.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If `<id>` is a non-integer string, then it is a "type name" that is a user-visible
type name.  If it is an integer, then it is not user-visible and is used  
exclusively to collate first-class Zed type values in the values array with
their corresponding type.
```

#### Type Name

> A type reference is encoded as refer to a previously defined type definition.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A type reference is encoded to refer to a previously defined type definition 
```

> and has the form:

Reviewer 2: For consistency.
```suggestion
and has the form
```

```
{
  "kind": "typename",
  "name": <id>,
}
```
where `<id>` is a JSON string representing a previously defined type name.

### Value Encoding

The primitive values comprising an arbitrarily complex Zed data value are encoded
as a JSON array of strings mixed with nested JSON arrays whose structure
conforms to the nested structure of the value's schema as follows:
* each record, array, and set is encoded as a JSON array of its composite values,

> * a union is encoded as a string of the form '<selector:<value>>' where `selector`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* a union is encoded as a string of the form `<selector:<value>>` where `selector`
```

is an integer string representing the positional index in the union's list of
types that specifies the type of `<value>`, which is a JSON string or array

> as described recursively herein,
> * a type value is encoded as its integer type identifier represented as a string, and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
as described recursively herein,
* a map is encoded as ...
* a type value is encoded as its integer type identifier represented as a string, and
```

* each primitive that is not a type value
is encoded as a string conforming to its ZSON representation, as described in the
[corresponding section of the ZSON specification](zson.md#33-primitive-values).

For example, a record with three columns --- a string, an array of integers,
and an array of union of string, and float64 --- might have a value that looks like this:
```
[ "hello, world", ["1","2","3","4"], ["1:foo", "0:10" ] ]
```

## Framing ZJSON objects

A sequence of ZJSON objects may be framed in two primary ways.

> First, they can simply be a sequence of newline delimited JSON where

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, they can simply be [newline delimited JSON (NDJSON)](http://ndjson.org/), where
```

each object is transmitted as a single line terminated with a newline character,

> e.g., the [zq](https://github.com/brimdata/zed) CLI command writes its

Reviewer: ```suggestion
e.g., the [zq](https://github.com/brimdata/zed/tree/main/cmd/zq) CLI command writes its
```

ZJSON output as lines of NDJSON.

Second, the objects may be encoded in a JSON array embedded in some other
JSON-framed protocol, e.g., embedded in the the search results messages
of the [zqd REST API](../../api/api.go).

> It is up to an implementation to determine how the ZJSON

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is up to an implementation to determine how ZJSON
```

objects are framed according to its particular use case.

## Example

Here is an example that illustrates values of a repeated type,
nesting, records, array, and union:

```
{s:"hello",r:{a:1 (int32),b:2 (int32)} (=0)} (=1)
{s:"world",r:{a:3,b:4}} (1)
{s:"hello",r:{a:[1 (int32),2 (int32),3 (int32)] (=2)} (=3)} (=4)
{s:"goodnight",r:{x:{u:"foo" (5=((string,int32)))} (=6)} (=7)} (=8)
{s:"gracie",r:{x:{u:12 (int32)}}} (8)
```

> This data is represented in ZJSON as follows;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This data is represented in ZJSON as follows:
```

}
```

#### Type Definition

A type definition is encoded as a binding between a name and a Zed type
and represents a new type so named.  A type definition type has the form
```
{
  "kind": "typedef",
  "name": <id>,
  "type": <type>,
}
```
where `<id>` is a JSON string representing the newly defined type name
and `<type>` is a recursively encoded type.
If `<id>` is a non-integer string, then it is a user-visible
type name.  If it is an integer string, then it is not user-visible and is used  
exclusively to correlate first-class Zed type values in a values array with
their corresponding type.

#### Type Name

A type reference is encoded as a reference to a previously defined type definition
and has the form
```
{
  "kind": "typename",
  "name": <id>,
}
```
where `<id>` is a JSON string representing a previously defined type name.

### Value Encoding

The primitive values comprising an arbitrarily complex Zed data value are encoded
as a JSON array of strings mixed with nested JSON arrays whose structure
conforms to the nested structure of the value's schema as follows:
* each record, array, and set is encoded as a JSON array of its composite values,

> * a union is encoded as a string of the form `<selector:<value>>` where `selector`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* a union is encoded as a string of the form `<selector>:<value>>` where `selector`
```

is an integer string representing the positional index in the union's list of
types that specifies the type of `<value>`, which is a JSON string or array
as described recursively herein,

> * a map is encoded as a list of keys of values where each the key and the value
> alternate in sequence as elements of an array that are recursively encoded,

Reviewer 2: Should be something like this.
```suggestion
* a map is encoded as a JSON array of two-element arrays of the form
`[ <key>, <value> ]` where `key` and `value` are recursively encoded,
```
